% TITLE: The Interface Culture
% ----------------------------
% From In the beginning… was the command line

% BY: Neal Stephenson
% LICENSE: All Rights Reserved!
% YEAR: 1999
% FROM: https://web.archive.org/web/20150505004034/http://www.uiowa.edu/~c08g001d/Stephenson_Interface.pdf

A few years ago I walked into a grocery store somewhere and was presented
with the following tableau vivant: near the entrance a young couple were standing
in front of a large cosmetics display. The man was stolidly holding a shopping
basket between his hands while his mate raked blister-packs of makeup off the
display and piled them in. Since then I've always thought of that man as the
personification of an interesting human tendency: not only are we not offended to
be dazzled by manufactured images, but we like it. We practically insist on it. We
are eager to be complicit in our own dazzlement: to pay money for a theme park
ride, vote for a guy who's obviously lying to us, or stand there holding the basket
as it's filled up with cosmetics.

I was in Disney World recently, specifically the part of it called the Magic
Kingdom, walking up Main Street USA. This is a perfect gingerbready Victorian
small town that culminates in a Disney castle. It was very crowded; we shuffled
rather than walked. Directly in front of me was a man with a camcorder. It was
one of the new breed of camcorders where instead of peering through a
viewfinder you gaze at a flat-panel color screen about the size of a playing card,
which televises live coverage of whatever the camcorder is seeing. He was
holding the appliance close to his face, so that it obstructed his view. Rather than
go see a real small town for free, he had paid money to see a pretend one, and
rather than see it with the naked eye he was watching it on television.
And rather than stay home and read a book, I was watching him.
Americans' preference for mediated experiences is obvious enough, and I'm not
going to keep pounding it into the ground. I'm not even going to make snotty
comments about it--after all, I was at Disney World as a paying customer. But it
clearly relates to the colossal success of GUIs and so I have to talk about it
some. Disney does mediated experiences better than anyone. If they understood
what OSes are, and why people use them, they could crush Microsoft in a year or
two.

In the part of Disney World called the Animal Kingdom there is a new attraction,
slated to open in March 1999, called the Maharajah Jungle Trek. It was open for
sneak previews when I was there. This is a complete stone-by-stone reproduction
of a hypothetical ruin in the jungles of India. According to its backstory, it
was built by a local rajah in the 16th Century as a game reserve. He would go
there with his princely guests to hunt Bengal tigers. As time went on it fell
into disrepair and the tigers and monkeys took it over; eventually, around the
time of India's independence, it became a government wildlife reserve, now open
to visitors.

The place looks more like what I have just described than any actual building
you might find in India. All the stones in the broken walls are weathered as if
monsoon rains had been trickling down them for centuries, the paint on the
gorgeous murals is flaked and faded just so, and Bengal tigers loll amid stumps
of broken columns. Where modern repairs have been made to the ancient
structure, they've been done, not as Disney's engineers would do them, but as
thrifty Indian janitors would--with hunks of bamboo and rust-spotted hunks of
rebar. The rust is painted on, or course, and protected from real rust by a plastic
clear-coat, but you can't tell unless you get down on your knees.

In one place you walk along a stone wall with a series of old pitted friezes carved
into it. One end of the wall has broken off and settled into the earth, perhaps
because of some long-forgotten earthquake, and so a broad jagged crack runs
across a panel or two, but the story is still readable: first, primordial chaos leads
to a flourishing of many animal species. Next, we see the Tree of Life surrounded
by diverse animals. This is an obvious allusion (or, in showbiz lingo, a tie-in) to
the gigantic Tree of Life that dominates the center of Disney's Animal Kingdom
just as the Castle dominates the Magic Kingdom or the Sphere does Epcot. But
it's rendered in historically correct style and could probably fool anyone who
didn't have a Ph.D. in Indian art history.

The next panel shows a mustachioed H. sapiens chopping down the Tree of Life
with a scimitar, and the animals fleeing every which way. The one after that
shows the misguided human getting walloped by a tidal wave, part of a latter-day
Deluge presumably brought on by his stupidity.
The final panel, then, portrays the Sapling of Life beginning to grow back, but
now Man has ditched the edged weapon and joined the other animals in standing
around to adore and praise it.

It is, in other words, a prophecy of the Bottleneck: the scenario, commonly
espoused among modern-day environmentalists, that the world faces an
upcoming period of grave ecological tribulations that will last for a few decades or
centuries and end when we find a new harmonious modus vivendi with Nature.
Taken as a whole the frieze is a pretty brilliant piece of work. Obviously it's not
an ancient Indian ruin, and some person or people now living deserve credit for it.
But there are no signatures on the Maharajah's game reserve at Disney World.
There are no signatures on anything, because it would ruin the whole effect to
have long strings of production credits dangling from every custom-worn brick, as
they do from Hollywood movies.

Among Hollywood writers, Disney has the reputation of being a real wicked
stepmother. It's not hard to see why. Disney is in the business of putting out a
product of seamless illusion -- a magic mirror that reflects the world back better
than it really is. But a writer is literally talking to his or her readers, not just
creating an ambience or presenting them with something to look at; and just as
the command-line interface opens a much more direct and explicit channel from
user to machine than the GUI, so it is with words, writer, and reader.

The word, in the end, is the only system of encoding thoughts -- the only medium --
that is not fungible, that refuses to dissolve in the devouring torrent of electronic
media (the richer tourists at Disney World wear t-shirts printed with the names of
famous designers, because designs themselves can be bootlegged easily and
with impunity. The only way to make clothing that cannot be legally bootlegged is
to print copyrighted and trademarked words on it; once you have taken that step,
the clothing itself doesn't really matter, and so a t-shirt is as good as anything
else. T-shirts with expensive words on them are now the insignia of the upper
class. T-shirts with cheap words, or no words at all, are for the commoners).

But this special quality of words and of written communication would have the
same effect on Disney's product as spray-painted graffiti on a magic mirror. So
Disney does most of its communication without resorting to words, and for the
most part, the words aren't missed. Some of Disney's older properties, such as
Peter Pan, Winnie the Pooh, and Alice in Wonderland, came out of books. But
the authors' names are rarely if ever mentioned, and you can't buy the original
books at the Disney store. If you could, they would all seem old and queer, like
very bad knockoffs of the purer, more authentic Disney versions. Compared to
more recent productions like Beauty and the Beast and Mulan, the Disney
movies based on these books (particularly Alice in Wonderland and Peter Pan)
seem deeply bizarre, and not wholly appropriate for children. That stands to
reason, because Lewis Carroll and J.M. Barrie were very strange men, and such
is the nature of the written word that their personal strangeness shines straight
through all the layers of Disneyfication like x-rays through a wall. Probably for
this very reason, Disney seems to have stopped buying books altogether, and now
finds its themes and characters in folk tales, which have the lapidary, time-worn
quality of the ancient bricks in the Maharajah's ruins.

If I can risk a broad generalization, most of the people who go to Disney World
have zero interest in absorbing new ideas from books. Which sounds snide, but
listen: they have no qualms about being presented with ideas in other forms.
Disney World is stuffed with environmental messages now, and the guides at
Animal Kingdom can talk your ear off about biology.

If you followed those tourists home, you might find art, but it would be the sort of
unsigned folk art that's for sale in Disney World's African- and Asian-themed
stores. In general they only seem comfortable with media that have been ratified
by great age, massive popular acceptance, or both.

In this world, artists are like the anonymous, illiterate stone carvers who built the
great cathedrals of Europe and then faded away into unmarked graves in the
churchyard. The cathedral as a whole is awesome and stirring in spite, and
possibly because, of the fact that we have no idea who built it. When we walk
through it we are communing not with individual stone carvers but with an entire
culture.

Disney World works the same way. If you are an intellectual type, a reader or
writer of books, the nicest thing you can say about this is that the execution is
superb. But it's easy to find the whole environment a little creepy, because
something is missing: the translation of all its content into clear explicit written
words, the attribution of the ideas to specific people. You can't argue with it. It
seems as if a hell of a lot might be being glossed over, as if Disney World might
be putting one over on us, and possibly getting away with all kinds of buried
assumptions and muddled thinking.

But this is precisely the same as what is lost in the transition from the commandline
interface to the GUI.

Disney and Apple/Microsoft are in the same business: short-circuiting laborious, explicit
verbal communication with expensively designed interfaces. Disney is a sort of user
interface unto itself -- and more than just graphical. Let's call it a Sensorial Interface.
It can be applied to anything in the world, real or imagined, albeit at staggering expense.

Why are we rejecting explicit word-based interfaces, and embracing graphical or
sensorial ones -- a trend that accounts for the success of both Microsoft and Disney?

Part of it is simply that the world is very complicated now -- much more
complicated than the hunter-gatherer world that our brains evolved to cope with --
and we simply can't handle all of the details. We have to delegate. We have no
choice but to trust some nameless artist at Disney or programmer at Apple or
Microsoft to make a few choices for us, close off some options, and give us a
conveniently packaged executive summary.

But more importantly, it comes out of the fact that, during this century,
intellectualism failed, and everyone knows it. In places like Russia and Germany,
the common people agreed to loosen their grip on traditional folkways, mores,
and religion, and let the intellectuals run with the ball, and they screwed
everything up and turned the century into an abbatoir. Those wordy intellectuals
used to be merely tedious; now they seem kind of dangerous as well.

We Americans are the only ones who didn't get creamed at some point during all
of this. We are free and prosperous because we have inherited political and
values systems fabricated by a particular set of eighteenth-century intellectuals
who happened to get it right. But we have lost touch with those intellectuals, and
with anything like intellectualism, even to the point of not reading books any
more, though we are literate. We seem much more comfortable with propagating
those values to future generations nonverbally, through a process of being
steeped in media. Apparently this actually works to some degree, for police in
many lands are now complaining that local arrestees are insisting on having their
Miranda rights read to them, just like perps in American TV cop shows. When it's
explained to them that they are in a different country, where those rights do not
exist, they become outraged. Starsky and Hutch reruns, dubbed into diverse
languages, may turn out, in the long run, to be a greater force for human rights
than the Declaration of Independence.

A huge, rich, nuclear-tipped culture that propagates its core values through
media steepage seems like a bad idea. There is an obvious risk of running astray
here. Words are the only immutable medium we have, which is why they are the
vehicle of choice for extremely important concepts like the Ten Commandments,
the Koran, and the Bill of Rights. Unless the messages conveyed by our media
are somehow pegged to a fixed, written set of precepts, they can wander all over
the place and possibly dump loads of crap into people's minds.

Orlando used to have a military installation called McCoy Air Force Base, with
long runways from which B-52s could take off and reach Cuba, or just about
anywhere else, with loads of nukes. But now McCoy has been scrapped and
repurposed. It has been absorbed into Orlando's civilian airport. The long
runways are being used to land 747-loads of tourists from Brazil, Italy, Russia
and Japan, so that they can come to Disney World and steep in our media for a
while.

To traditional cultures, especially word-based ones such as Islam, this is
infinitely more threatening than the B-52s ever were. It is obvious, to everyone
outside of the United States, that our arch-buzzwords, multiculturalism and
diversity, are false fronts that are being used (in many cases unwittingly) to
conceal a global trend to eradicate cultural differences. The basic tenet of
multiculturalism (or "honoring diversity" or whatever you want to call it) is that
people need to stop judging each other-to stop asserting (and, eventually, to stop
believing) that this is right and that is wrong, this true and that false, one thing
ugly and another thing beautiful, that God exists and has this or that set of
qualities.

The lesson most people are taking home from the Twentieth Century is that, in
order for a large number of different cultures to coexist peacefully on the globe
(or even in a neighborhood) it is necessary for people to suspend judgment in
this way. Hence (I would argue) our suspicion of, and hostility towards, all
authority figures in modern culture. As David Foster Wallace has explained in his
essay "E Unibus Pluram," this is the fundamental message of television; it is the
message that people take home, anyway, after they have steeped in our media
long enough. It's not expressed in these highfalutin terms, of course. It comes
through as the presumption that all authority figures--teachers, generals, cops,
ministers, politicians--are hypocritical buffoons, and that hip jaded coolness is the
only way to be.

The problem is that once you have done away with the ability to make judgments
as to right and wrong, true and false, etc., there's no real culture left. All that
remains is clog dancing and macrame. The ability to make judgments, to believe
things, is the entire it point of having a culture. I think this is why guys with
machine guns sometimes pop up in places like Luxor, and begin pumping bullets
into Westerners. They perfectly understand the lesson of McCoy Air Force Base.
When their sons come home wearing Chicago Bulls caps with the bills turned
sideways, the dads go out of their minds.

The global anti-culture that has been conveyed into every cranny of the world by
television is a culture unto itself, and by the standards of great and ancient
cultures like Islam and France, it seems grossly inferior, at least at first. The only
good thing you can say about it is that it makes world wars and Holocausts less
likely -- and that is actually a pretty good thing!

The only real problem is that anyone who has no culture, other than this global
monoculture, is completely screwed. Anyone who grows up watching TV, never
sees any religion or philosophy, is raised in an atmosphere of moral relativism,
learns about civics from watching bimbo eruptions on network TV news, and
attends a university where postmodernists vie to outdo each other in demolishing
traditional notions of truth and quality, is going to come out into the world as one
pretty feckless human being. And -- again -- perhaps the goal of all this is to make
us feckless so we won't nuke each other.

On the other hand, if you are raised within some specific culture, you end up with
a basic set of tools that you can use to think about and understand the world.
You might use those tools to reject the culture you were raised in, but at least
you've got some tools.

In this country, the people who run things -- who populate major law firms and
corporate boards -- understand all of this at some level. They pay lip service to
multiculturalism and diversity and non-judgmentalness, but they don't raise their
own children that way. I have highly educated, technically sophisticated friends
who have moved to small towns in Iowa to live and raise their children, and there
are Hasidic Jewish enclaves in New York where large numbers of kids are being
brought up according to traditional beliefs. Any suburban community might be
thought of as a place where people who hold certain (mostly implicit) beliefs go to
live among others who think the same way.

And not only do these people feel some responsibility to their own children, but
to the country as a whole. Some of the upper class are vile and cynical, of
course, but many spend at least part of their time fretting about what direction the
country is going in, and what responsibilities they have. And so issues that are
important to book-reading intellectuals, such as global environmental collapse,
eventually percolate through the porous buffer of mass culture and show up as
ancient Hindu ruins in Orlando.

You may be asking: what the hell does all this have to do with operating
systems? As I've explained, there is no way to explain the domination of the OS
market by Apple/Microsoft without looking to cultural explanations, and so I can't
get anywhere, in this essay, without first letting you know where I'm coming from
vis-a-vis contemporary culture.

Contemporary culture is a two-tiered system, like the Morlocks and the Eloi in
H.G. Wells's The Time Machine, except that it's been turned upside down. In The
Time Machine the Eloi were an effete upper class, supported by lots of
subterranean Morlocks who kept the technological wheels turning. But in our
world it's the other way round. The Morlocks are in the minority, and they are
running the show, because they understand how everything works. The much
more numerous Eloi learn everything they know from being steeped from birth in
electronic media directed and controlled by book-reading Morlocks. So many
ignorant people could be dangerous if they got pointed in the wrong direction,
and so we've evolved a popular culture that is (a) almost unbelievably infectious
and (b) neuters every person who gets infected by it, by rendering them unwilling
to make judgments and incapable of taking stands.

Morlocks, who have the energy and intelligence to comprehend details, go out
and master complex subjects and produce Disney-like Sensorial Interfaces so
that Eloi can get the gist without having to strain their minds or endure boredom.
Those Morlocks will go to India and tediously explore a hundred ruins, then come
home and built sanitary bug-free versions: highlight films, as it were. This costs a
lot, because Morlocks insist on good coffee and first-class airline tickets, but
that's no problem because Eloi like to be dazzled and will gladly pay for it all.

Now I realize that most of this probably sounds snide and bitter to the point of
absurdity: your basic snotty intellectual throwing a tantrum about those unlettered
philistines. As if I were a self-styled Moses, coming down from the mountain all
alone, carrying the stone tablets bearing the Ten Commandments carved in
immutable stone -- the original command-line interface -- and blowing his stack at
the weak, unenlightened Hebrews worshipping images. Not only that, but it sounds like
I'm pumping some sort of conspiracy theory.

But that is not where I'm going with this. The situation I describe, here, could be
bad, but doesn't have to be bad and isn't necessarily bad now:

- It simply is the case that we are way too busy, nowadays, to
  comprehend everything in detail. And it's better to comprehend it dimly, through
  an interface, than not at all. Better for ten million Eloi to go on the Kilimanjaro
  Safari at Disney World than for a thousand cardiovascular surgeons and mutual
  fund managers to go on "real" ones in Kenya.
- The boundary between these two classes is more porous than I've
  made it sound. I'm always running into regular dudes--construction workers, auto
  mechanics, taxi drivers, galoots in general--who were largely aliterate until
  something made it necessary for them to become readers and start actually
  thinking about things. Perhaps they had to come to grips with alcoholism,
  perhaps they got sent to jail, or came down with a disease, or suffered a crisis in
  religious faith, or simply got bored. Such people can get up to speed on particular
  subjects quite rapidly. Sometimes their lack of a broad education makes them
  over-apt to go off on intellectual wild goose chases, but, hey, at least a wild
  goose chase gives you some exercise.
- The spectre of a polity controlled by the fads and whims of voters
  who actually believe that there are significant differences between Bud Lite and
  Miller Lite, and who think that professional wrestling is for real, is naturally
  alarming to people who don't. But then countries controlled via the command-line
  interface, as it were, by double-domed intellectuals, be they religious or secular,
  are generally miserable places to live.
- Sophisticated people deride Disneyesque entertainments as pat
  and saccharine, but, hey, if the result of that is to instill basically warm and
  sympathetic reflexes, at a preverbal level, into hundreds of millions of unlettered
  media-steepers, then how bad can it be? We killed a lobster in our kitchen last
  night and my daughter cried for an hour. The Japanese, who used to be just
  about the fiercest people on earth, have become infatuated with cuddly adorable
  cartoon characters.
- My own family--the people I know best--is divided about evenly
  between people who will probably read this essay and people who almost
  certainly won't, and I can't say for sure that one group is necessarily warmer,
  happier, or better-adjusted than the other.

